---
title: Cherrapunji
date: 02.01.2024
tags: []
cover:
  src: Enter Cover image source
  alt: Enter Cover image alt text
published: false
---

# Cherrapunji

Cherrapunji is also known as Sohra by the locals and it is inhabited by a tribe of people called the Khasi. It is a city in Meghalaya, which is also known as Scotland of the East. Meghalaya translated literally means Abode of the Clouds. During my first day here I was incredibly lucky to have a full day of sunshine, because usually there is rain around here on almost every day of the year, at least once in a day. The flood plains of Bangladesh are nearby in the South since this part of India is very close to the border and they bring hot and humid air, that then rains upon the hills in Meghalaya when cooling down and going up. Hence this area is rich in Waterfalls and small rivers and ponds. It is absolutely beautiful and during my stay in India the one day I spent walking around close to Sohra was one of the most intense. Somehow I experienced so many things within a few hours that time itself seemed to stretch into a little eternity and I enjoyed that a lot. 

I started the day, writing a little bit into this electronic diary - or blog - I am still not sure if I am ever going to publish any of these "articles" or even what to call them. I just like writing them to act as some sort of sink for my memories, thoughts and all. To one day come back and re-read them, and by re-reading also reliving the experience. 

## Small Villages

After I finished this morning routine, I went out with my camera and bag, making sure not to forget the rain jacket and walked along a small road through the grassy hills. Clouds were roaming in the distance, always promising heavy rains but never delivering on that promise. The destination I wanted to walk to is one of the biggest tourist attractions in this area - a waterfall named Seven Sisters Waterfall in English and known as Nosngithiang falls by the Khasi locals. On the way there I walked along a small river through small but beautiful little villages. In this region of India most people are of Christian belief, so there are little churches and crosses on many buildings and those little details somehow give a lot of charm to this place. The vegetation also adds to the picturesqueness of the villages, lots of trumpet flowers grow next to small ponds and small streams and the clouds above add a soft light to the atmosphere so that everything looks a little bit dreamy and sleepy. Because it was Sunday everything was a little more quiet than usual as well. 

## Seven Sisters

On my way I was greeted by local children, screaming "hiiii" and then later "byeeee" from the top of their lungs from their gardens, windows and rooftops and frantically waving at me. I smiled and was in a state of happiness, slowly walking along the road, happy with where I was and that it was such a beautiful day. Eventually I reached close to the place where I wanted to go, a viewpoint of the famous waterfalls and saw a little path along some trees leading to what looked like a view platform, so I went along that path and couldn't help myself but scream a little when I saw the magnificent view that opened up in front of my eyes. There is no pictures that can really do justice to the majestic, breathtaking magnitude that the Seven Sisters Waterfalls have. It's just a ninety degrees cliff in the jungle, bare rocks, where the water has carved it's way, going down for a drop of around hundred or so meters, and the water just plunging over the edge into the depth. Because now is still only the very very beginning of the monsoon, the waterfalls are relatively empty, but water still flowed down the cliff and it looked stunning. Little spots of sunlight seeped through the clouds, further enhancing the already jaw-dropping scenery. It was unbelievably beautiful and I called my girlfriend at home to share it with her over a video call. 

## Riverbed Walk

After I had gorged myself enough on the view, I made the way back to the small village, named Mawsmai, I had passed through earlier, but this time took the more adventurous path through the river bed. People were sitting on the rocks, washing their clothes and there were two girls watching me, giggling in the distance and then running away, shy, because a stranger was walking  in their river backyard, taking photos and jumping over the rocks. Sometimes I wonder what these kids might think in those moments, at the same time curious, but also afraid and shy. I continued among the gushing sound of the water running down the stream, taking in sight of the beautiful almost turquoise and emerald colors, the small waterfalls and the dry surrounding washed out stone amidst greenery and bushes. It was utterly mesmerizing and I could have sat there for hours, just enjoying the view and walking and climbing and jumping down this small riverside but I still had plans for the day, so I continued on my way to a nearby cave of the same name as the village - Mawsmai cave. 

## Mawsmai Cave

By now the sun had come out and it was quite warm, but not too much. Meghalaya still has a relatively temperate climate due to it's high amount of precipitation and position in the North of India, away from the Equator. I was in a low mood when I saw all the tourists and their cars at the entrance of the cave and that mood dropped even more when I was charged 50 Rs for the entrance fee to the cave, 30 Rs for myself and 20 Rs for my camera. For a second I even thought to myself: "Hmm, maybe I should rather go somewhere else than this touristy place". But I am glad that I didn't pursue this idea and went to the cave instead. Going through the cave was an absolute treat - a little adventure. Mawsmai cave is a typical stalactite flowstone cave, but the amazing thing about it that differentiates it from the caves and caverns in Europe that I had visited in the past is how somewhat inaccessible it is. Sure there are lights and in some sections there are some guardrails, but for the most part the path goes directly over the slippery stones in the caves and you have grab onto the rock formations to not slip and go under and over them and through small tunnels and holes, over small ledges and puddles and deeper into the cave, until you emerge into a small chamber, where light peeks through a crack in the ceiling and you can see the jungle above. At this point light rays are playing with the beautiful stones and roots from the trees above, hang loosely down into the cave and the atmosphere is just wild and adventurous and at the same time utterly beautiful. 

## Tourists...

The only thing taking a little toll on that experience is the hordes of Indian tourists, marching through that place, clicking selfies, but not stopping even for one second to really appreciate the beauty of that place. For them it is just - "oh yeah, I have been to that cave, look here is the selfie I took with this foreigner I met there" - But most probably haven't seen the beautiful rays of light that you just see when you stand at the right angle to the entrance of the cave or the little spires of rock, almost glowing with a surreal orange where the light hits them, or the second exit of the Mawsmai cave and the entrance to another, non lit cave, where it gets really dark and kind of scary and inaccessible only a few meters into the cave. Most of them will never see that beauty of that place in this particular way and somehow this makes me a little bit sad. But anyways, for me the experience was one of a kind and there is one picture I asked another person there to click of me, that is one of my most favorite pictures of the whole trip so far. 

## An interview?

At the end of the little cave adventure, I got stopped by a group of people from a college making a documentary about the cave for an interview and of course I said yes and so they interviewed me for a few questions, asking me where I am from, where I am traveling to and from and what I am doing India and whether or not I like Meghalaya and this place in general. It was a pretty fun experience but also somehow stressful to be behind a camera for no good reason and not knowing if I should look at the interviewer or at the camera itself. Anyways I am hyped about their documentary once it is out and will get a link to it once they release it. 

## Green Hills

After this cave experience I went up a little concrete stairway to a small hill next to the cave and from there enjoyed the beautiful green rolling hills of this place. For the first time since I was here I really understood why this region is named Scotland of the East and Abode of the Clouds. Rolling green hills, that I can imagine to look kind of grey and hazy during the rainfalls is what I imagine when I think of Scotland and that's exactly what this place must look like during the monsoon. Now on that somewhat sunny and completely dry day I was treated with a surreal scene though. The clouds left a spotted map of shades and light on the landscapes of green hills, constantly moving, changing and making the hills look alive. It reminded me of a place I want to go to, but probably won't have the time for this time around - Dzuko valley in Nagaland, where very similar green hills stretch into the distance. 

## Waterfall Swimming

Some time later, I wandered away on the small roads over and around these beautiful hills towards my last destination of the day. A waterfall named Devil's dive on Google maps due to a misunderstanding because the locals call it - Double Drive - because there were two ropeways - a "double drive" - carrying the two main export goods of the area - coal and limestone - over the border to Bangladesh. On my way there I heard kids screaming "hiiii" again from the distance and then saw them running down the hill road towards me and I was happy. Two, three at first and then many more, in total twenty five, some with buckets, some with umbrellas, girls and boys, in all different ages. I greeted them and asked them were they were heading and the older ones of them spoke really good English. One boy in particular, named Jedaia conversed with me in conversationally secure English talking about all kinds of things. All of them were from an orphanage nearby and it turned out that they also wanted to enjoy this beautiful sunny Sunday by going swimming in the Double Drive waterfall. So I told them I was headed the same way, was greeted back with warm smiles and giggles and just went around with a group of orphans to the waterfall, letting them and their two dogs show me the way. 

Because I took some pictures along the way and talked with Jedaia we reached the waterfall a bit later than the other kids and so they were already playing around in the water, swimming, laughing, joking, singing and dancing, hopping over the rocks and generally having a good time. I also went for a swim in the pool underneath the main waterfall. Taking some pictures of the kids there, having fun, asking them to take some pictures of me also. It was a surreal experience and I treasure it within my memory for the rest of my days as one of the most beautiful moments I have ever lived through. 

## Tea in the Orphanage

After some time we went back to the orphanage, a few memories richer, with lots of beautiful pictures of this natural and gem - hidden away from the tourist crowds - on my cameras SD card. On our way back we met one of the guardians of the children's home and Jedaia invited me to come visit and sip some cup of tea, so I said, yes why not, let me spend some more time with all of the kids, talk a little more about their lives and meet the people that take care of them. This was a good decision to make. Somehow it feels a little awkward interacting with kids, like I don't belong there, and their caretakers look at me somewhat questioningly because I am a single lone person walking around with a bunch of kids, enjoying the waterfalls... well. But after some time this initial lack of trust dissipates and I sit there, explain about differences in culture, about how cameras and polarized filters work, hand my camera to the children so that they can play around with it and show them pictures from the different places in the world, all the while sipping a cup of tea and enjoying some biscuits. Meanwhile the sun sets, the time flies away, talking with the older kids who know English, playing pick-a-booh with the shy little ones, that look at me but try to hide as soon as I look back or want to take a photo. This place, their small, orderly and clean kitchen, the swarm of kids, flocking around a smartphone, watching pictures in awe and wonder, mesmerized by the beauty of this world and the curiosity and happiness that these people have, that impression is engraved into my brain and heart now and like the moment at the waterfall is something I hope to never forget. 

## Sunset clouds

But all these beautiful things have to come to an end. At some point I have to go, I have to say goodbye, I have to continue my journey and get back to the place where I stay. Jedaia and his friend accompany me back to the road and we admire the beautiful colors of the sunset clouds together. The scenery is stunning and I am a bit sad, because most of the color is already gone from the clouds and I haven't taken any pictures like I had planned earlier during my time in the hills, because I had forgotten the time while sipping tea in the children's home. But that was a price worthy of paying and a lesson in opportunity costs learned, there is only ever one thing you can do at a time, and getting lost in that one thing, forgetting about all the rest of the world during that moment is completely fine and even beautiful. And that is something that I want to and have to remember when I get hit by FOMO. Don't be anxious, just focus on the thing at hand and loose yourself in it, completely, until you forget what is surrounding you and are just one thing. Happy. Content. 

So I continued my way back, along the small roads and paths in Mawsmai village, admiring the stunning sunset scenery, watching the blue hour come and go, and envelop those green rolling hills in darkness, while the sky in the distance is glowing a golden orange and the clouds shimmering above in the moonlight. I think my mouth hang open, struck in awe for way too long that day. There was a small football field, where some kids and teens were playing some soccer and I seriously considered joining for some time, but then it was already getting dark quickly and I still had to get back to my room for the night and so I didn't. I just clicked some more pictures of the surroundings and went on my way, stopping for some food and tea on a little shop by the road. 

## Evening memories

While eating I met a woman named Sangita from Hyderabad who ended up giving me a lift back to the place where I stayed and I also met the person from the entrance of the cave again, making him utterly confounded when I showed him the picture I took of him at the cave entrance because he had already forgotten that we had met. I also ate some chicken gravy and rice and vegetables and went to a small trade exposition closer to the main city of Sohra, and there ate some tomato soup and chicken spring roll in the restaurant of the owner of the hotel where I am staying. The tomato soup especially I enjoyed and as I am writing this my mouth starts watering, hungering for more. Back at the hotel I met a doctor from another place in Assam and we talked about music, Covid, jobs, machine learning and many other things and again this day, I forgot the time and before I realized it was really late and I went to bed eventually. But this day was one of the most dense and the most beautiful I have lived in my entire life. It was almost a bit too much, because it doesn't feel like a day at all in my memory, more like I had spent a whole week or even month here. Sometimes to me it is crazy how time is this thing we so fluidly perceive, that a year can feel like a day and a day can feel like a year... and with this I will end this brain dump of mine, hope to see you again some time soon. 
