_pages/needlestack.md, before:

# Needlestack

Hang on, what exactly is a needlestack you might ask?

I am glad you did! In essence, the internet is a giant haystack of data - content and information. Haystacks are filled with a lot of stuff that is mostly useless - hay. But the haystack of the internet also contains some needles in between – the literal needles in a haystack – small nuggets worth to be found and cherished. And I found and collected them in the form of bookmarks, notes and more for some time now, piling them up into what is now a **needlestack.** 

![This is a foto of a needlestack {1166x777}](/needles.jpg)

So: A needlestack is a personal collection of treasures that somebody found on the internet. Things that they are glad to have found. Things that they want to share with others. Things that were needles, in the haystack. 

Sometimes the things have small notes and explanations attached to them, sometimes they don't and they are just plain old links. Either way, this site is *my* needlestack and it reflects parts of the internet that I love. And I hope it will be of use to you! Enjoy browsing, and don't get overwhelmed, this is still quite long - cheers!

Full Disclaimer: The idea of collecting information in this format and giving it it's unique name "Needlestack" is not mine. I found it on the blog of Ethan Maurice and loved it soo much that I had to make my own list of awesome "needles".

[Here's his](https://ethanmaurice.com/needlestack) in case you're curious.

This needlestack will be organized into different sections. You can jump from section to section and jump back to the overview at any time. Don't be afraid if things might look like a bit much, I have been using the internet for some time now and therefore have gathered quite a few resources, that I consider to be *amazing*. 

The flood of content is dense, even if restricted to only what I like. The internet is a vast space – an endless space – I would argue. If you have something awesome you want to share with me (that is not yet on the list) [please do so](https://ricotrebeljahr.com/contact). I'll have a look and maybe even put it here!

## Table of contents

## Videos 

### Single Videos

### Youtube Channels I watch regularly
1. [Vsauce]()
2. [Kurzgesagt]()
3. [MIT OCW]()
### Lecture Series

## Developer journey

As you may or may not know – I am a developer. I consider this as one of the best jobs to have and would recommend everybody to embark on this journey. Programming is a life changing and empowering ability and it's just really fun and enjoyable too. It can give you flow like experiences and I like comparing it to playing an instrument or creating art.

Coding can be deeply relaxing, while at the same time being extremely stimulating and intellectually intricate. And it is creative too. It allows you to build your own cool things, be that websites, games, apps, or things that have never existed before. 

Plus, becoming a better programmer is an open ended journey. The amount of stuff people put out there and create every year is vast, so vast in fact that you can not learn it all. Coding is something that can keep you on an interesting journey of discovery and greater understanding for the rest of your life. I would argue that everybody should learn how to code. 

And this section of the needlestack is filled with the things that I have found on the internet. Links and resources that are specific to this hobby of mine. This hobby that turned into a job and that is now an integral part of my life. If you don't are not interested in computers and any of these things, you can safely skip this part and [continue down here.](#stuff-on-github)

### How to Learn Programming

My favorite website for that: [FreeCodeCamp](https://freecodecamp.org). It has a full fledged interactive curriculum that gives you 100% of the knowledge you need to start your career as a fullstack developer. I have done their whole curriculum in 2017 and have since then worked at companies such as Softgames, Klarna, ESA (the European Nasa) and Ironhack. Freecodecamp even has [a youtube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC8butISFwT-Wl7EV0hUK0BQ), filled with an amazing amount of content. But the best idea is to do the exercises, because "learning" from videos is very different from actually coding and doing things yourself.

Once you already know the basics of at least one programming language and want to quickly pick up another [you should give Exercism a try](https://exercism.org/). It's a platform, where you solve increasingly harder coding katas – small exercises – in any programming language out there, and pick up the language that way. They even have mentors that review your code - and best of all, everything here is also completely free!

### Articles about Programming

There is a whole flood of articles, about how to do simple things etc. and I won't give any of them here. Just mention a few blogs, and articles or meta articles that I found the be immensely useful and to which I regularly return to!

Learn your ABC - in other words [Always Be Coding](https://medium.com/always-be-coding/abc-always-be-coding-d5f8051afce2). This is a central idea and I think is what people should really do. Code in your free-time on stuff that you like. This is how you grow, immensely. Following your curiosity where it leads to, picking up new languages and epic skills along the way. 

I consider the [Programming Achievements](https://jasonrudolph.com/blog/2011/08/09/programming-achievements-how-to-level-up-as-a-developer/) by Jason Rudolph to be the layout for a lifelong path of curiosity and learning as a developer. Just tackling one of those achievements might take months or years, depending on your commitment. They focus on the open endedness of the space and I love that. His idea is also available as [a gist to fork](https://gist.github.com/jasonrudolph/1133830#file_programming_achievements.md), so that you can tick of the boxes of the achievements yourself.

### Mindblowing AI research
[Dalle-1](https://openai.com/blog/dall-e/) - 24th February 2021
[Dalle-2](https://openai.com/dall-e-2/) - 13th April 2022
[Codex Demo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGUCcjHTmGY)

### Machine Learning

## Stuff on Github

Let's get even more meta. Github is a platform that people use to host code and other things, enabling the [version control of Git](https://git-scm.com/doc). This allows them to work together in big teams efficiently and save the history of their creations. Mostly – but not exclusively – used for code, it's a huge, open repository of knowledge. Some of the best stuff on the internet lives in spaces within Github, called repos. 

There is so much awesome stuff there, that people started building repos, containing links to other awesome repos. Basically compiling lists of the best stuff on Github. 

Sounds familiar? It's basically the same idea as what you are reading right now. And they don't call it needlestacks, but awesome lists.

So here is the root of that awesome (pun very much intended) project: [Awesome Github - An awesome list of awesome lists](https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome)

You should also check out the person maintaining that repository: [Sindre Sorhus](https://github.com/sindresorhus). He is one of the most active open source maintainers *ever* and has some crazy cool projects in his portfolio (including the awesome list idea). 
Some of which, you might have even used already. Like [chalk](https://github.com/chalk/chalk), [ora](https://github.com/sindresorhus/ora) or [ava](https://github.com/avajs/ava).

When you browse the meta list of awesome things you will come across some cool stuff - like a list of [awesome mind-expanding books](https://github.com/hackerkid/Mind-Expanding-Books#readme), a list of [productivity resources](https://github.com/jyguyomarch/awesome-productivity#readme) or a [list of awesome computer science courses.](https://github.com/prakhar1989/awesome-courses#readme)

People even built tools around those lists [helping you to search and navigate through them](https://awesomelists.top/#/). 

## Music

### Jazz - Favorites 
### Artists I love

## Mathematics

## Physics

## Philosophy

## Apps I like

## Books - Go see my books section, I guess ;) 

## Finance / Investing

## Blogs I read regularly

## Newsletters worth subscribing to

## Products

books:
Cracking the Coding Interview PDF: https://github.com/Avinash987/Coding/blob/master/Cracking-the-Coding-Interview-6th-Edition-189-Programming-Questions-and-Solutions.pdf
A crazy book on LISP - it's quite famous and has it's own acronym -> SICP: https://web.mit.edu/6.001/6.037/sicp.pdf
There is also a lecture series on it which is old but AWESOME: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8FE88AA54363BC46 - it's one of the few that I have watched in it's entirety.
just checkout the list of free programming books: https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books

curriculums and roadmaps:
The free Coding Interview University: https://github.com/jwasham/coding-interview-university#computer-science-courses
Another university curriculum: https://github.com/ossu/computer-science
Preparation for System Design Interviews (had one of these at Klarna, probably as a Junior nobody will ever ask you): https://github.com/checkcheckzz/system-design-interview
    also used this for preparation: https://github.com/donnemartin/system-design-primer
    and this: https://github.com/shashank88/system_design
more about algorithms and practice: https://github.com/gaerae/awesome-algorithms-education
developer roadmap for different kinds of devs: https://github.com/kamranahmedse/developer-roadmap
computer science curriculum for 5 months: https://github.com/llSourcell/Learn_Computer_Science_in_5_Months

there is also loads of free stuff from Google:
https://techdevguide.withgoogle.com/
https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/get-started
https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/kickstart

website practice ideas:
ideas for further projects/websites: https://github.com/melanierichards/just-build-websites

the rabbit hole a lot of this is linked to:
https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome
think of it as the "meta" list - a list about awesome lists linking to the cool stuff of the internet. if you want to learn something/practice something, whatever. Just search on it there I guess and have enough content of high quality for the next few months to chew through

Commit message:

Add more sections to the needlestack

_pages/needlestack.md, after:

# Needlestack

Hang on, what exactly is a needlestack you might ask?

I am glad you did! In essence, the internet is a giant haystack of data - content and information. Haystacks are filled with a lot of stuff that is mostly useless - hay. But the haystack of the internet also contains some needles in between – the literal needles in a haystack – small nuggets worth to be found and cherished. And I found and collected them in the form of bookmarks, notes and more for some time now, piling them up into what is now a **needlestack.** 

![This is a foto of a needlestack {1166x777}](/needles.jpg)

So: A needlestack is a personal collection of treasures that somebody found on the internet. Things that they are glad to have found. Things that they want to share with others. Things that were needles, in the haystack. 

Sometimes the things have small notes and explanations attached to them, sometimes they don't and they are just plain old links. Either way, this site is *my* needlestack and it reflects parts of the internet that I love. And I hope it will be of use to you! Enjoy browsing, and don't get overwhelmed, this is still quite long - cheers!

Full Disclaimer: The idea of collecting information in this format and giving it it's unique name "Needlestack" is not mine. I found it on the blog of Ethan Maurice and loved it soo much that I had to make my own list of awesome "needles".

[Here's his](https://ethanmaurice.com/needlestack) in case you're curious.

This needlestack will be organized into different sections. You can jump from section to section and jump back to the overview at any time. Don't be afraid if things might look like a bit much, I have been using the internet for some time now and therefore have gathered quite a few resources, that I consider to be *amazing*. 

The flood of content is dense, even if restricted to only what I like. The internet is a vast space – an endless space – I would argue. If you have something awesome you want to share with me (that is not yet on the list) [please do so](https://ricotrebeljahr.com/contact). I'll have a look and maybe even put it here!

## Table of contents

## Videos 

### Single Videos

### Youtube Channels I watch regularly
1. [Vsauce]()
2. [Kurzgesagt]()
3. [MIT OCW]()
### Lecture Series

## Developer journey

As you may or may not know – I am a developer. I consider this as one of the best jobs to have and would recommend everybody to embark on this journey. Programming is a life changing and empowering ability and it's just really fun and enjoyable too. It can give you flow like experiences and I like comparing it to playing an instrument or creating art.

Coding can be deeply relaxing, while at the same time being extremely stimulating and intellectually intricate. And it is creative too. It allows you to build your own cool things, be that websites, games, apps, or things that have never existed before. 

Plus, becoming a better programmer is an open ended journey. The amount of stuff people put out there and create every year is vast, so vast in fact that you can not learn it all. Coding is something that can keep you on an interesting journey of discovery and greater understanding for the rest of your life. I would argue that everybody should learn how to code. 

And this section of the needlestack is filled with the things that I have found on the internet. Links and resources that are specific to this hobby of mine. This hobby that turned into a job and that is now an integral part of my life. If you don't are not interested in computers and any of these things, you can safely skip this part and [continue down here.](#stuff-on-github)

### How to Learn Programming

My favorite website for that: [FreeCodeCamp](https://freecodecamp.org). It has a full fledged interactive curriculum that gives you 100% of the knowledge you need to start your career as a fullstack developer. I have done their whole curriculum in 2017 and have since then worked at companies such as Softgames, Klarna, ESA (the European Nasa) and Ironhack. Freecodecamp even has [a youtube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC8butISFwT-Wl7EV0hUK0BQ), filled with an amazing amount of content. But the best idea is to do the exercises, because "learning" from videos is very different from actually coding and doing things yourself.

Once you already know the basics of at least one programming language and want to quickly pick up another [you should give Exercism a try](https://exercism.org/). It's a platform, where you solve increasingly harder coding katas – small exercises – in any programming language out there, and pick up the language that way. They even have mentors that review your code - and best of all, everything here is also completely free!

### Articles about Programming

There is a whole flood of articles, about how to do simple things etc. and I won't give any of them here. Just mention a few blogs, and articles or meta articles that I found the be immensely useful and to which I regularly return to!

Learn your ABC - in other words [Always Be Coding](https://medium.com/always-be-coding/abc-always-be-coding-d5f8051afce2). This is a central idea and I think is what people should really do. Code in your free-time on stuff that you like. This is how you grow, immensely. Following your curiosity where it leads to, picking up new languages and epic skills along the way. 

I consider the [Programming Achievements](https://jasonrudolph.com/blog/2011/08/09/programming-achievements-how-to-level-up-as-a-developer/) by Jason Rudolph to be the layout for a lifelong path of curiosity and learning as a developer. Just tackling one of those achievements might take months or years, depending on your commitment. They focus on the open endedness of the space and I love that. His idea is also available as [a gist to fork](https://gist.github.com/jasonrudolph/1133830#file_programming_achievements.md), so that you can tick of the boxes of the achievements yourself.

### Mindblowing AI research
[Dalle-1](https://openai.com/blog/dall-e/) - 24th February 2021
[Dalle-2](https://openai.com/dall-e-2/) - 13th April 2022
[Codex Demo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGUCcjHTmGY)

### Machine Learning

## Stuff on Github

Let's get even more meta. Github is a platform that people use to host code and other things, enabling the [version control of Git](https://git-scm.com/doc). This allows them to work together in big teams efficiently and save the history of their creations. Mostly – but not exclusively – used for code, it's a huge, open repository of knowledge. Some of the best stuff on the internet lives in spaces within Github, called repos. 

There is so much awesome stuff there, that people started building repos, containing links to other awesome repos. Basically compiling lists of the best stuff on Github. 

Sounds familiar? It's basically the same idea as what you are reading right now. And they don't call it needlestacks, but awesome lists.

So here is the root of that awesome (pun very much intended) project: [Awesome Github - An awesome list of awesome lists](https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome)

You should also check out the person maintaining that repository: [Sindre Sorhus](https://github.com/sindresorhus). He is one of the most active open source maintainers *ever* and has some crazy cool projects in his portfolio (including the awesome list idea). 
Some of which, you might have even used already. Like [chalk](https://github.com/chalk/chalk), [ora](https://github.com/sindresorhus/ora) or [ava](https://github.com/avajs/ava).

When you browse the meta list of awesome things you will come across some cool stuff - like a list of [awesome mind-expanding books](https://github.com/hackerkid/Mind-Expanding-Books#readme), a list of [productivity resources](https://github.com/jyguyomarch/awesome-productivity#readme) or a [list of awesome computer science courses.](https://github.com/prakhar1989/awesome-courses#readme)

People even built tools around those lists [helping you to search and navigate through them](https://awesomelists.top/#/). 

## Music

### Jazz - Favorites 
### Artists I love

## Mathematics

## Physics

## Philosophy

## Apps I like

## Books - Go see my books section, I guess ;) 

## Finance / Investing

## Podcasts

I listen to a lot of podcasts, but there are only a few (for now that is 3) that I regularly return to. Even with those 3 I only tend to watch episodes that interest me, with people that work on stuff I am interested in - mostly tech, health and startup related. 
In order of importance to me: 
1. [Lex Fridman](https://lexfridman.com/podcast/)
1. [Huberman Lab](https://hubermanlab.com/)
1. [Farnam Street](https://fs.blog/knowledge-project-podcast/)

My favorite episodes of all time are from Lex Fridman's interviews with Josha Bach. Currently there are Episodes [#101](https://lexfridman.com/joscha-bach/) and [#212](https://lexfridman.com/joscha-bach-2/). I am a huge fan of Josha Bach's way of explaining things and his talks on the CCC ([1](), [2](), [3]()) are absolutely amazing. If you are in any way interested in how the brain might work and how we might be able to build brains in silicon by using AI, you absolutely have to check them out. They are extremely fast paced but still. I also link to those same videos up in the [Videos section](#videos) with a little more description attached to it.

Others I hop into every once in a while for good episodes, or because specific episodes have been recommended to me are:
1. [Tim Ferris Show](https://tim.blog/podcast/)
1. [Joe Rogan Experience](https://open.spotify.com/show/4rOoJ6Egrf8K2IrywzwOMk) - especially the interviews with David Sinclair ([1](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0Gifr7mhEsQBI5oGzJomz2?si=ffa40c9ba9a84a19), [2](https://open.spotify.com/episode/4lFkgWqK3QmBH5zRvCwFNm?si=f9af90ebd6d84ff1), [3](https://open.spotify.com/episode/55UlxYWPfV46f7puMkZPeD?si=124101ce98e74593)), Elon Musk ([1](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2B07nNz3WIl7ptnCpu3TEy?si=7dcc47b47a484842), [2](https://open.spotify.com/episode/08t3BnVDXUn4YQVuDohhYg?si=181c51b636024eb1), [3](https://open.spotify.com/episode/2aB2swgyXqbFA06AxPlFmr?si=dd4d9b81f3464ca3)) and Andrew Huberman ([1](https://open.spotify.com/episode/1HnJSVAxlfZVREkojSJ39c?si=ad8aa212b2b64f03), [2](https://open.spotify.com/episode/0ScxTKuC8EaZpIxAfWZNpu?si=52fbe3cee14a4fe7)) were extremely worthwhile. 

## Blogs I read regularly

1. [WaitButWhy](https://waitbutwhy.com/) - this is hands down my favorite blog. The best I know on the internet. And the reason I love it so much is because Tim Urban creates masterpieces that help to break down and understand really complex topics. And he adds a good amount of humor and stick figure drawings too, some of them so memorizable that it is just insane. On top of that he tries to be objective and really drill down and understand things. All of this adds up to reads, that sometimes take a day, with lots of resources attached to it. When you open all the links from one of his posts, you might easily end up spending a few weeks on reading all of them. I literally had over a 100 different tabs open after reading his [Artificial Intelligence](https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/01/artificial-intelligence-revolution-1.html), [SpaceX](https://waitbutwhy.com/2015/08/how-and-why-spacex-will-colonize-mars.html), and [Neuralink](https://waitbutwhy.com/2017/04/neuralink.html) Articles. 100+ different resources for further reading – each! But the best of all, he coins terminology that abstracts away hard concepts into neat, easy to remember boxes. Like the [yearning octopus](https://waitbutwhy.com/2018/04/picking-career.html), the [panic monster and the procrastination monkey](https://waitbutwhy.com/2013/10/why-procrastinators-procrastinate.html), the [thinking ladder](https://waitbutwhy.com/2019/09/thinking-ladder.html) as well as [echo chambers and idea labs](https://waitbutwhy.com/2019/10/idea-labs-echo-chambers.html)... The list goes on. So yeah, if I had to recommend only one blog to read - that would be the one for sure. The next ones get much harder to order though.

1. [Paul Graham](http://www.paulgraham.com/articles.html) - Paul Graham has to be on the top of this list. I think his pieces combine technology and startup thinking from one of the best persons in the field. He loves Lisp and has his reasons for it, and almost everything on his blog has a unique spin and blend of his own. Even the old school look, with the crappy layout, is his own and his own alone. Some of the best pieces of his that I re-read regularly are [How to Think for Yourself](http://www.paulgraham.com/think.html), [Life Is Short](http://www.paulgraham.com/vb.html), [The Acceleration Of Addictiveness](http://www.paulgraham.com/addiction.html) and [Hiring Is Obsolete](http://www.paulgraham.com/hiring.html). Reading his blog is like reading a good book. His work makes you think, and there is always a little takeaway or some new angle to be found. Even after reading a piece for the 3rd or 4th time. And that makes his blog extremely worthwhile.

1. [Nat Eliason](https://www.nateliason.com/blog) - Nat Eliason's blog has probably shaped me a lot as well. Many of the ideas I share, he addressed, further clarifying them in my mind. Reading his posts has an addictive quality to it. Similar to blogs by Paul Graham, his essay style often looks at things from a different vantage point and gives them a slightyl different spin. Some of the pieces I liked a lot: 
[Not a full time creator](https://www.nateliason.com/blog/not-creator), [I am a stupid monkey and you are too](https://www.nateliason.com/blog/stupid-monkey), [How to start a blog that changes your life](https://www.nateliason.com/blog/start-a-blog) and [Forget Commitment, Invest in Something](https://www.nateliason.com/blog/invest-in-something). Some of his stuff is a little junky and not really worth reading, and he is a pro content marketer, so he makes you keep reading be exploiting the eck out o your curiosity gap, which is a bit annoying as well, but the multitude of ideas in his good pieces makes up for that. 

1. [Farnam Street](https://fs.blog/) - FS is a blog I used to love *a lot*. But it has grown a little boring over time, because I know most of their concepts and ideas from the books they recommend by now. It feels like after having read FS for some time, the usefulness declines. 

That in the end I am better of reading books instead. Especially because FS itself is more of an aggregator for insights from good books, letters, articles and other people. So I'd rather go straight to the source these days. 

But still, there are a few things I think FS did for me: It enhanced and nurtured a love for reading good non-fiction. And helped me to understand how really drilling down to make sure the books that I am reading are worthwhile, is as important as reading a lot. And Shane Parrish (the creator behind FS) introduced me to Charlie Munger and Waren Buffett. Overall I think his best articles are not his articles though - to me the best one is a transcript for ["This is Water" by David Foster Wallace](https://fs.blog/david-foster-wallace-this-is-water/), and I also love the ["Letter on Finding Your Purpose and Living a Meaningful Life" by Hunter S. Thompson](https://fs.blog/hunter-s-thompson-to-hume-logan/)


## Newsletters worth subscribing to

## Products

books:
Cracking the Coding Interview PDF: https://github.com/Avinash987/Coding/blob/master/Cracking-the-Coding-Interview-6th-Edition-189-Programming-Questions-and-Solutions.pdf
A crazy book on LISP - it's quite famous and has it's own acronym -> SICP: https://web.mit.edu/6.001/6.037/sicp.pdf
There is also a lecture series on it which is old but AWESOME: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL8FE88AA54363BC46 - it's one of the few that I have watched in it's entirety.
just checkout the list of free programming books: https://github.com/EbookFoundation/free-programming-books

curriculums and roadmaps:
The free Coding Interview University: https://github.com/jwasham/coding-interview-university#computer-science-courses
Another university curriculum: https://github.com/ossu/computer-science
Preparation for System Design Interviews (had one of these at Klarna, probably as a Junior nobody will ever ask you): https://github.com/checkcheckzz/system-design-interview
    also used this for preparation: https://github.com/donnemartin/system-design-primer
    and this: https://github.com/shashank88/system_design
more about algorithms and practice: https://github.com/gaerae/awesome-algorithms-education
developer roadmap for different kinds of devs: https://github.com/kamranahmedse/developer-roadmap
computer science curriculum for 5 months: https://github.com/llSourcell/Learn_Computer_Science_in_5_Months

there is also loads of free stuff from Google:
https://techdevguide.withgoogle.com/
https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/get-started
https://codingcompetitions.withgoogle.com/kickstart

website practice ideas:
ideas for further projects/websites: https://github.com/melanierichards/just-build-websites

the rabbit hole a lot of this is linked to:
https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome
think of it as the "meta" list - a list about awesome lists linking to the cool stuff of the internet. if you want to learn something/practice something, whatever. Just search on it there I guess and have enough content of high quality for the next few months to chew through
