---
title: "On the beauty of being alive."
excerpt: "I am sitting alone in my room. It is dark outside and my speakers play some soft and mellow music. FKJ, beautiful piano, some techno mixed into it... "
coverImage: "/assets/blog/barnsley-fern.jpg"
date: "2021-02-16T05:35:07.322Z"
author:
  name: Rico Trebeljahr
  picture: "/assets/blog/profile.jpeg"
ogImage:
  url: "/assets/blog/barnsley-fern.jpg"
---

## And the fragility of humanity. Or why things matter.

I am sitting alone in my room. It is dark outside and my speakers play some soft and mellow music. FKJ, beautiful piano, some techno mixed into it. It is from one of my favorite performances - a video from Cercle where he plays in front of no audience in the middle of nowhere in Bolivia in the Salar de Uyuni - a large flooded salt flat. The sun sets in the background while he plays, the sky mirroring itself in clear body of water that stretches beyond where the eye can see. The scene is beautiful and the music serene. One day I want to go there, but I wonder when that will happen. Currently I am sitting in my room at night, my mind wandering, reading a book, enjoying a warm cup of tea. My mind drifts of from the book that I am reading because it is late and I can not properly concentrate myself anymore. There is a soft dullness that is overcoming my body as the time goes on, closing my eyes, following the music and trains of thought that plop up in the mind from seemingly nowhere. It is wonderful. Those moments where you think about things and reflect and don't want time to be continuing, where you are in your room alone at night, listening to some music that you enjoy.

The usual questions pop up, what am I doing here, where do I want to go, there is just so many awesome things. Only yesterday I started building a minecraft-clone, learning another technology (threejs) to do so online. Why am I doing it? My mind searches for the monetary gain that the activity could provide me, but truth be told it is like so many things I do. There is no monetary value in them, I do them because I enjoy them, that is the whole point. Nobody pays me to read, nobody pays me to learn, nobody pays me to maintain my body, nobody pays me to take photos. But my mind worries about that. I want to be paid, I don't want to struggle for money in the future, but I never really stop to think why that is the case... Why do I actually want to have money? What is the value of it, when everything is going to be over in the end anyways? Won't I always have enough anyways and isn't that reason enough to not worry about it that much - only worry about it when the time is actually there and action needs to happen?

I want to create something of beauty, something that I can enjoy, that I am proud of having done. Working at Klarna at the moment is not that. It is a means to an end - I am doing it because I want to see the number in my ETF account grow so that I can retire early and do what ever the fuck I want to do with my time. During after hours I will read, gorge my brain on things I actually enjoy only to start the next day working again at something that I fundamentally deep down don't care about an iota. Something that makes people spend their money in mindless pursuits of new fancies... Is that really what I want to do?

But I digress... The name of this article suggests I will talk about two things: The beauty of living - and the fragility of humanity. So I should probably do that. Beauty is everywhere around us. When we look at the world and try to understand how it works and make some progress in doing so that is just wonderful. The exhilaration I can feel when something makes click while reading a book or watching a lecture and learning something new is just pure happiness. These types of feeling is what make life worth living.

The wonders of knowledge and how this world works and how massively complex it really is just stagger me every single time... How I can just listen to music... Without even thinking that there was a device somewhere picking up vibrations in the air, caused by somebodies hands manipulating an instrument, stored as tiny bumps on a magnetic disk, spinning rapidly while a small arm changes the polarization to deposit little bumps onto it. Then those bumps being read and transformed again later on on the computer of the artist, read into its internal workings, then sent to a server somewhere to be stored there, so that my computer now can requesting data from it to play music. That server kicking in again looking at the data on its storage medium, processing it, then sending it over the wires as electromagnetic pulses, an answer that reaches the wifi router in the next room, which re-encodes the signal again, changing it into electromagnetic fields and waves to send a message across the room that then hits the little antennae to the left of me, where the signal gets decoded again and put into electrons moving across wires, leading to currents that can be picked up and processed in my computer, by millions of tiny transistors, small electronic switches which then go on and change the behavior of yet different currents that then go on and drive my speakers to reproduce the specific frequencies and patterns of sounds that were recorded, by using a membrane very similar to that used for the recording but which can be moved by an electro-magnet by precisely timing of switching it on or off, so that it can generate similar pressure differences in the air, that then travel through the room towards my ears where they get funneled into a narrow space, leading to a fluid with small hairs in it to vibrate in a very certain manner, leading to the bending of those hairs, which are attached to nerve cells, which in turn produce an electric signal which is then using the information encoded in those electronic potentials, decoding it into sounds and mental representations and melodies that affect my mood in such a way that it makes me happy and my hairs stand up on end, listening to FKJ alone in my room. Grasping what he wanted to express with his music, transcending yet another level, beyond what notes and melodies are into the realm of human feelings and emotions. Thinking of it that way it seems like simply listening to music, a pleasure of mine is pure, utter, complete magic. And I think it is not just this that is pure magic and wonder if looked closely at, but literally EVERY damn thing in this world is similarly beautiful and complex and intermingled at a close enough level of perception.

And then there is the aspect of reflecting on these kinds of thoughts... Of sitting down and thinking deeply about them. The idea that I can actually turn around and look at all the phenomenons happening around me and have the resources and information in my hands to understand all this magic behind what is going on in this world. I think that is what I enjoy most in life, unwrapping these layers of complexity, trying to understand how things work, because somehow that just makes me incredibly happy when I do it.

So that is the beauty of being alive. That I can think and understand the world around me, with little tendrils of thought probing out into the unknown, looking at things I understand and at the same time don't understand, using the shared resources and knowledge that all the other people before me have gathered, the knowledge they built up over the centuries, to understand more about well... everything. I think that's called curiosity. And it is what makes me happy.

Listening to music like this makes me want to create. It inspires me to create something of similar beauty myself someday. Not necessarily music, but something that I can be proud of, something that is beautiful, be that something written, code projects, games, paintings, photography... whatever. It does not even matter I just know that I want to create things of beauty, because that's what all that understanding is about. To understand the elusive idea of quality that is described so beautifully by Robert Pirsig.

All this beauty and the quality of being alive however has a very harsh side to it, since having all this wonder also means that there is a risk of loosing it. The wonder is perishable, but by the quality of it's conscious experience I want it to be protected. I don't want to loose my mental state, because I revel so much in it. I enjoy it so much, that I don't want to give it away. And I think that is the main fragility of humanity. That our lives are perishable, that our mushy insides age and some day die. That the beauty we can see and manifest in this world is some day going to end and that we have to maintain it for it to persist just that little bit longer. I think that because of the ideas that humans can generate that there can be intermediate solutions found to this problem. Technology to a large extent enables us to transmit parts of that beauty, of our ideas, of our understanding - of the patterns we see in the world around us as well as the ones we create ourselves to the next generation and into the future. Technology enables us to share our creations for longer and longer times and make sure that they do not perish along the way. It allows us to become more understanding of the world around us and therefore can help us use it to create even more intricate and more beautiful patterns and persist them for even longer. However in all of this there is still this constant problem of keeping up all that beauty. Of keeping humanity and its creations alive for as long a time as possible to come. And best of all would be if I as an individual could also be part of that, because I don't want to perish, I don't want my life to end since it is simply too beautiful and to filled with wonder at every corner... But when I look at the state of the world at large I feel that humans are, much like me to wrapped up in the patterns they and others have created to do something about this fundamental problem. Instead of focusing more on producing and preserving patterns and guarding ourselves against the fate of death that haunts us at every step along the way we get comfortable in our lives, earning money to survive, because we care about food and our immediate rewards and life's necessities more than we care about the long term future of our patterns and ideas. Because in the end - even though we think it is about beauty sometimes when alone in our room at the middle of the night, a part of our brain disagrees. Because it thinks that all that talk is nice and good but at the end of the day, it is more important to eat and procreate. And so we mostly follow in the footsteps of what most of people did for most of the time. Instead of helping to create more patterns and beauty and finding ways to preserve them and us forever we get lost in the struggle for daily survival. Being stressed about bills we have to pay and the dentists appointments that we have missed, keeping our small jobs and not actually doing what we know that we should do.
