---
title: "Things to do"
excerpt: "There are so many things in this highly complex world, that humans can devote their time to, so many new things and skills to be learned, so much to discover, to do, to invent... It is insane. Crazy. And when I come to think of all these options I get hit with FOMO attacks every single time."
coverImage: "/assets/blog/write-code.png"
date: "2020-03-16T05:35:07.322Z"
author:
  name: Rico Trebeljahr
  picture: "/assets/blog/profile.jpeg"
ogImage:
  url: "/assets/blog/write-code.png"
---

There are so many things in this highly complex world, that humans can devote their time to, so many new things and skills to be learned, so much to discover, to do, to invent... It is insane. Crazy. And when I come to think of all these options I get hit with FOMO attacks every single time. Not enough time, is all I can manage to think. And then I get sad about a world where we have all the possibilities and freedoms. A world where we can pursue so many things that are worthwhile and fun to do. To me, this is the most fundamental dilemma of being alive. Especially when one is extremely curious. The internet gives access to so much information. People all over the world work to develop new things all the time. And information is increasing so fast that I can not keep up with it. There is simply not enough time for me to learn everything I would like to learn. Simply because the information out there is growing so much faster than I could ever consume it. There is not enough time.

And then there are things outside of knowledge, outside of learning. There are skills to master, things to pursue and everybody tells you to focus on one thing only to be successful. To master only one thing because otherwise, you can never get anywhere with your skills. So it is not only the multitude of things out there that makes me sick but the depth of each of them. You can spend many lifetimes, perfecting this one little thing. And still... There would be awe and wonder within you, doing only this one thing.

It is because skills are never capped. There is always more to learn... always something to perfect a tiny little bit better and always something new. Something better... And thus this journey of learning, of becoming better, is an endless one. Because there is no such thing as a finite state, a state where one can sit down and rest and be complete. And that worries me.

Because when there are hundreds of things worth pursuing because they are fun and all might take a lifetime to perfect - then how the hell should you decide which one to pursue? How can you justify not missing out on all there is? Only to be able to focus on only one thing, to gain depth and understanding within this narrow scope? And the second question is - do you have to?

Knowing that death is very imminent and there is little time to do so much, I ask myself what to do in the short time left. And here is the list of things I want to do and get some degree of mastery over within my short chunk of lifetime...

1. Coding
2. Writing
3. Traveling
4. Photographing
5. Painting
6. Experimenting
7. Parkour
8. Basketball
9. Volleyball
10. Climbing
11. Music
12. Languages

These are what make me me. They are the things I discovered are fun for me. The things that I found out to enjoy. And hence the things that I want to fill every waking minute of my life with.

So now comes the hard part. Dissecting these and putting them into a hierarchy. Thinking of why I want to do all of them. And rank them according to what I want to do the most. It is the part where I have to think from first principles and argue why each of them is something I want to pursue. It is about finding out why these are the things that I am passionate about. And then find a way to get them into unison, dividing my time pursuing them all somehow.

So let's start from the bottom up.

Languages:

Languages are one of the most important things in this world. When speaking a foreign language our brain structure changes. Which makes us able to communicate with other people. People that we otherwise could not have communicated with. There are so many languages and people that we could gain knowledge from if we only spoke there language. It is crazy and insane on how many friends and people and connections we miss out on. Only because we only speak our mother tongue and a little bit of English. There are a few languages that I thus want to learn over my lifetime. Languages that give solid coverage and would make me able to talk with almost anybody on this planet. They are these - Arabic, Spanish, Chinese, Hindi and French.

Why these? With them you can travel anywhere and be able to communicate in a language that somebody else speaks. Especially when you add English to this mix as well you are more than good to go. All have their unique cultures attached to as well. Cultures that you can only understand when you actually speak their language. And thus learning these languages ties into my vision of seeing this world. The vision of discovering places and foreign cultures. The idea of traveling, of learning about what this world has to offer and is like. And the adventure of meeting new people, making friends from around the globe. And of connecting to other humans through communication. To learn. To share, get inspired and touched by other people's life. And that's something I value.

Music:

Whenever I see some of my friends who know how to sing and play instruments I can not help but envy them. Seeing them play and create something - the enjoyment they get out of the process is something I want to share in. Music is something that has so completely passed my life. So completely that I never learned how to play an instrument. But listening to music and watching other people create it is one of the things I enjoy a LOT.
And I can feel the happiness and kick other people get out of creating music. The passion that drives them to put in hours upon hours of work. The passion to practice, to get out this little tiny bit of value that is something I want to do one day as well. Music, which is something that is not yet part of my life, will one day be. That is at least what I want to happen. It will be a challenge and a tough one, but in the end, it will be worth it. Because like so many other activities it expands the way we see and perceive the world. Our ways of interacting with it, the way we value certain things because we have the skills to do it. I had the same experience when I learned how to draw and when I learned how to take photographs. These types of skills change perception and music is all the same. Music if listened to by an active ear and a brain, that knows how to value it, can enrich the life of the listener. And the feeling a musician has when performing a piece - when sounds flow from his hands... it must be amazing. When their faces seem lost in concentration but at peace, they must feel the same way a coder or painter feels. This feeling is something I want to experience from different sources. Thus I want to be able to create music one day. One day.

A thought about flow.

Which leads me to another point or idea that shapes my world, except the one for progress. And that is the idea of losing myself in progressing. Something that relates all the above to each other is that they are set up in the perfect way to forget time.
To be able to do them and completely lose all sense of the world around. I get sucked into a mindless state of concentration, by these activities. Something so many other people also know. Something called flow. So not only do I want to stretch myself to progress, I also want to experience flow. Being stretched to exhaustion but happy in doing what I love. Being in flow, getting more experience, expanding my skills, my knowledge, progressing but without things feeling like work. This is the intersection point that I want to spend most of my time at. The point where work seems and feels effortless. Where I can be concentrated and learn and time, hours pass by and it almost feels like waking up from a deep sleep when something ruptures this type of concentration. To me all of those activities share a common factor in this. The focus and all consuming attention they require to just get right is enormous and this stretching, this concentration, this gathering of skill and mind, pouring into one task to get to the desired outcome is what I want. What I seek. It reminds me a lot of meditation where one basically does the exact same, only that while meditating the focus is on something that does not usually need the concentration, something that is natural to us, something that would just happen. And in doing this work of concentrating on the breath, on the feeling of the body, on the calmness of the mind, on the sensation of being, I can also become at peace. With myself, with my mind, while minutes and then hours pass by without noticing. Because I am stretched into this pursuit of a skill, lost in utmost concentration and that is something that is worthwhile. So in a sense, all of the activities listed above, at least for me, are a kind of meditation. They are things that I know can get me into flow states reliably and therefore I want to do them more often and the more often I do each of them, the more reliably they can catapult me into these flow states and therefore the more I can loose myself in being at ease. At rest at peace, bent into concentration, bent into doing something meaningful. Something meaningful to me, something that leads to me forgetting myself, my ego, my ideas, my surroundings. And that feels amazing. Especially if coupled with the rush that comes after realizing that in these phases of flow a creative process has happened, something that I can take out of them, something that reminds me of the process, a result, a progression. Something worthwhile.

In Parkour this would be a new skill of movement, in photography this would be an array of pictures I like, in painting it would be a piece of art, in programing it would be a product or website that I wrote, in music this would be a piece of music I composed, in a language that would be a conversation I can have with someone in their mother tongue, in writing it would be a piece of text, that I like. All of the activities I value have this in common. They are flow states, that in the end create something. And this something is a measure of the progress, a measure of the flow state and something that is so pleasing to have because all these things are in the end accomplishments. Things that I created, things that I made. Things that I can show to others, to communicate who I am and what makes me - me.

This expression of individuality in all of the skills is what they are about as well. It is one of the driving forces, the motivation if you so will to keep going. The motivation to move on, to grow, to do greater and better things than before, to reach out there and see how far one can get. And this again, is worthwhile on it's own but the things one gets to show for it, the things that make the journey memorable and graspable are what keeps me awake at night. But realizing this, these tokens of feats done, are also what causes FOMO, because when doing more than one thing there is simply not enough time to outdo somebody who has a razor sharp focus. The more things one does, the lesser the distance one can cover is and therefore the number and greatness of the things brought back from those journeys of flow become less if compared to the tokens other people had accomplished during their lifetimes.

But I think this is fine. It stings the ego, but it is fine. Because losing myself and becoming better than I was yesterday are on their own worthwhile and can make me happy and an overdriven ego is something that probably makes you unhappy anyways. So, it should not be too important to be the best at the things we do. If only we are a little better than the day before and overall have the sense of progression and spend as much time as possible within the zone of flow, we should be happy. Right?

A deeper truth about myself

The sting though. When reading these words they at the same time sound so right and so wrong to me. Because something inside of me WANTS to bet the best, it wants to compete, not with myself but with others. It wants to win at this stupid race that is nonexistent and it threatens to kill all the joy in my life and I wonder how it got there. And why it exists. This feeling of wanting to be better, to excel, to outgrow and be better than others. It is nested deep within me and I do not like it at all and think about whether there are ways to change it because in the end this is something that could keep me from trying. In the end it is the fixed mindset, afraid of failure, screaming in pain, when others are better and the things I enjoy get tainted so quickly by others being better at them.

Which makes me angry at myself, because after all this is stupid. Here I am, living my life, having fun and enjoying most of it, yet I am also there, doubting all of the things I am doing, making up my own values and shit but then at my core not being able to follow through with my passions because I want to be better than others. This is ironic and somehow depressing. Maybe this is why I should meditate.

Meditate to find out more about myself, to become comfortable with this screaming voice within my chest, that gets angry at my best friend if we play games together, that makes me sad when playing football and my team is not giving their best and we lose because of it, the thing that makes me assign blame onto others, were probably I am at fault. The thing that makes me smile from the inside on the failing of others because it makes me seem a notch better. And I am sick of this, but nonetheless better off in these situations. Even though I know better and thought a lot about it and want to change, it is exceptionally hard to change the psyche to tolerate other people's greatness and be only in competition with myself. I think it is what ultimately leads me to sometimes excessive gaming and giving up on trying because trying and failing in the end, at least failing compared to others, because the tokens I brought back from journeys of flow are worth less in my eyes, would hurt to badly. So I stop journeying...

A sense of progress.

I think the theme unifying all of the points above is that I really really really like to learn and experience new stuff and to gradually become better at it by practicing and learning and practicing and making new experiences. It feels exhilarating to know stuff. When something makes click and I finally understand it better it makes me happy. There are those moments where I just can't help myself but smile and almost brim with happiness that makes me beam and dance around my tiny little room at home to the music that is on.

So what is the core value that I want to drive my life - the one theme unifying it all. It is curiosity and a passion for learning. But then I have to ask, why. Why do I feel that it is so important to learn new stuff constantly?

Why is learning important to me? It turns out that the thing that excites me about learning is not so much the learning itself and neither is it the point of knowing more than before and neither is it the ability to then explain and share it with others.

It is way simpler than that. I crave improvement. Above all. When I think of why I want to learn and understand things it is because I want to get better over time and I think that this is the unifying theme driving the whole universe forward. It is what makes me moved to tears when reading about the progress of technology, what makes me crazy with joy when solving a problem in coding after hours of failed attempts, what makes me practice and enjoy doing parkour and sports in general. What makes me addicted to such games as Minecraft, especially the modded versions, where sense of progress is inherent and you can build upon the stuff you did previously and learn and progress. Progression. That's what life is all about. It is what life has always been about and it is what I am about and what I want to pursue during my lifetime. I want to progress and progress and progress and progress and build myself and my surrounding into something that is better than it was before.

I want to challenge myself by writing, by reading, by doing sports, by learning music, by traveling, by painting, by photographing...

So - my life is going to be one of progress, because that's what I ultimately want and value and therefore it is what I am going to pursue. Which makes me realize one thing. The fear of missing out is as useless to me as anything else because I am the happiest when stretching myself to the very edge. Experiencing new things, progressing. And missing out on things does not keep me from doing this. Quite the contrary, I'll have to accept that I am going to miss out on an awful lot, to actually become happy. Because stretching myself into new situations requires to turn a blind eye onto the things, that I could become and instead focus on the challenge ahead. On the thing happening right there, right now. Right here.

Keeping up a mix of healthy habits of reading, writing, photographing, traveling, learning languages, coding, painting, doing sports - especially parkour and learning music should therefore be my top priorities in life. I want to do all of them and realize that when not pursuing all of them I will become unhappy. So doing all of them is what I actually am. It is what I want to be and it is where I want to become better at. Not only at a single one of these, but at all of them. Even if that means that the distance in terms of skill I can travel in any single one of these is narrow and predefined. Because I am not single mindedly focusing on any of them I can only go that far. But since that's not what is important to me, I don't fucking care! As long as I get a little better in one of these by doing one of these every day I will be living a life worthwhile... A life I actually enjoy. A life that to me seems worth living and a life that I can value.

Life is progression. All the way down to it's core. It is about becoming better - about evolution. And therefore my deepest and most ingrained value in life is just that. Progression. I want to grow as a human being in all the dimensions that I as a person encompass.

So - now that I cleared this up for myself I have to ask myself what can stop me from living this life I want, so that I can be able to navigate these possible obstacles and refine other values that exist only because of what I value.

The Problems:

Sloth

Health

Financial Shackles

Procrastination

Addictions of all sorts, like computer games, TV, porn, drugs

Fear of failure

Comparing myself to others

Fearing the attitudes of others

These are the worst "enemies" that I will encounter in my life. Which says a lot about the state of my life, because food, water and shelter are not on this list, which is something almost all of us should be more grateful about. However, what do I mean by these problems in detail and how can they block the path to a fulfilling life?

Health:

This one is obvious. Having a body that can support you in your endeavours of doing things you enjoy for a longer time is important and to have that body you need to be healthy. But being healthy is not just about the body, it is also about mental health because there are a few things that can kill you from the inside of your brain even though you have a tough body and are 'healthy' by all other definitions. Therefore to enjoy life, some obvious things that almost all humans need unilaterally need to be in place for you to be able to live happy and pursue the things you value within your life. You need a certain amount of friends and close relationships and a certain amount of connection to a group. Because humans are tribal animals and without being part of a small group of individuals you can suffer a lot, to the point where you get depressed and your actual physical health deteriorates together with your mental health.

Financial Shackles:

This one might be the most subtle and creeping of all of the problems that are out there, yet I feel that it is so common, that I am scared of this one the most. In our society we need money for everything we do. If you want to survive you probably will have to have some way of paying for yourself and the more time you want to spend doing stuff you love the more you will have to worry about finding a way that can pay for all the things you need. Basically being able to pursue something you love is only possible, if you have enough time to do so and the more time you actually have to spend on getting around to survive the daily life, the less time there will be to actually do all of the stuff you want to do. And that to me seems bad. Obviously the ideal idea would be to get paid for the stuff you like to do, but even that is dangerous, because when your interests changes you have to find a way to get paid for this new thing you like doing now and this might be hard or impossible. And then you will have to keep doing the stuff you do not like anymore, only as a means to support yourself. And the worst of it all. Circumstances can change, there can be hardships in your life or things you need to take care of that might tie you down, people you have to pay for, because you have the reliability of caring for them. Kids, parents, friends etc. And being able to actually do that will have such an high priority over your life that it might end up being the only thing you can actually do within your life. Working a shitty job that drains you out of all your energy just so you can provide your family or yourself with enough food and a warm shelter to sleep over the night. And I feel this must be the most cruel of things to see happening within life, when things still seem to go well and nothing is wasted into chaos. When this goes especially bad it might lead to more severe even more pressing problems of actual life and death and hunger and pain and thirst and cold and all the hardships that first world citizens can not even imagine which yet are a reality for so so many people out there. So there is another point of getting rid of financial shackles as early as possible and as well as possible. It is the idea that you can make the life of others people better by the way of your work which is one of the most rewarding things you can do. At the moment I am trying to figure out my way of providing for myself and learning the skills and doing the work necessary, so that eventually one day in the future I can provide for myself with ease and take all the time I want and have in this world to do only the things that I actually deeply care for and want to do in life.

Sloth and Procrastination:

Both go almost hand in hand and are something like a fundamental problem to everything. Humans and that includes you and me are very lazy beings. Again, from an evolutionary standpoint this makes a lot of sense, because in being lazy we can conserve energy and the most laziest fellows that did not die because of their inborn laziness over time flourished and passed on more of their genes out competing their other fellow humans. Hence laziness is something that almost all of us share to a certain extent. I mean of course there again are small genetic differences like there are with everything and probably some people have an easier time not being lazy who are therefore able to do more, more easily.

Turns out I am not one of them. Which is a problem and something that I want to change. The nice thing about sloth is that when coupled to habits and habitification we can get around the triggers for it. Because habits are stronger than sloth and therefore a way to get around the problem of being too lazy to do the hard work necessary to develop skills that can propel people into zones of flow they are key. The solution to having way less trouble actually getting shit done and the thing everybody should try to get integrated into their life more of. If certain things are habitualized and almost triggered automatically the time spent progressing on stuff and the time spent in states of flow skyrockets. And that is important, because that is what we - or at least I want. I know I can be happy when I am doing stuff that I love and get lost in a state of flow. I know I am happy when I am progressing and developing my skills and even more so if I gain something that can show for that.

Habits are the key way to get there. Writing and exercising parkour daily, painting every week, coding every day and learning languages every other day as well. Reading in the evenings, sleeping enough and eating healthily... All of these are necessary things and habitification helps. Like a lot.

I can remember the times where I would sit down and play computer games for hours and hours on end, because it was a habit, after school, I would get home, turn on the PC, watch some YouTube, while munching on some shitty food and then turning into my happy little gaming world, because of laziness and the fear of failing in the real world. And that made me happy. Except for the times, where I shut down the PC had to go to sleep and then had to ask myself how it could happen that I lost hours without having anything to show for it and a non valuable skill that nobody else would recognize. Because I am an ego driven person after all and therefore the value I got out of playing games and the justification for most of them was that I could show the cool progress I had to my friends... But still I was unhappy over all. There are so many more and so much cooler things in the real world that I simply can not justify playing games any more. Because FOMO and the fear of death are a great motivator and companion here. Life is short and I do not want to spend it with something that I can not hundred percent justify for myself why I am doing it and computer games are just this sort of thing. Engineered to give quick but quickly vanishing sense of progression without putting in enough work and not enough to build lasting flow states and an overarching concept of progression.

Fear of Failure:

This is the unifying theme tying every problem together. When these problems arise and have not been prepared for properly and even though we struggle hard and long they can not be overcome and we die, that's the worst of places a live can go. I do not think of the nice - fail and then recover story and get on with life, I am thinking more of the kind of failure that you can not recover from, the kind of failure that eats your dreams alive, because you can not actually recover from it. I am still trying to think of ways this could really happen to somebody in my situation because maybe it can not actually and when failing there will always be a way out but well. Analyzing the problems and hardships within life that might be ahead is an important step in avoiding fatal failure. Other than fatal failure, failure is good though and should be embraced. When things go awry there is always something that can be learned, unless this going awry leaves you in a situation where your hands are tied and your destiny is being written without your participation... However most failures at least in our modern day society are not usually like that and it is a matter of mindset to overcome them and that is the actual problem I can see sneaking in here. Because it is easy to say that one is not afraid of failures but when digging deeper it is just the same as with not caring about other people's opinions. Because failures are fucking scary and I know I am afraid of risking things and that's something to be super aware and cautious of because like all the other things on this list of problems it can keep me from doing what I love, from experiencing progression from experiencing flow states, because I can lock myself down in fear of failing. Stopping to do the things that I would love to do otherwise, simply because I am afraid of what is going to happen. When I fail and can not overcome the challenge - what do I do - how can I develop a strategy to get back to my feet and KEEP doing the things I love, keep trying, keep making, keep creating? One burden less to worry about here would be to have the financial security and freedom that is needed. Because if this other problem is out of the way the actual damage of failing will be restricted to one of ego, not to one on economical scales. It is untying the life that is tangled up with the ego and the economy and unfurling the economy out of it, so that the things we do in life fail it does not become a downward spiral. So that our ideas and things we value can live detached and we are actually free to pursue them.

Comparing to others:

This one is also a really bad problem. When comparing myself to others within the age where we live I can always find somebody who devoted their whole life to only this purpose, somebody more gifted than me who on top of that put in all of her soul and all of her time into doing only this one thing that this person was good at. Therefore they become more than good, they become exceptionally good and so good that only if you were to try harder than they did you could overcome their feats. And this at least robs me of all the motivation I could otherwise muster when thinking of it. Because I do not want to put in this much time, I want to do other stuff I like as well and living a life single mindedly oriented toward one main purpose and one main purpose only seem boring and dull in the end - even if the price gained is that within this narrow segment of skill one can become the best.

It takes the fun and the passion out of the progress of learning of becoming better. Even though I know this, I can still feel how this is a problem though, because deep within me I am comparing myself nonetheless. No matter how hard I try not to... I still do. And that sucks. And is a problem I will have to solve, if I want to become happy living my own life, excelling only when compared to myself the day before.

So - why do I shame myself when playing too many hours of computer games?

A question I have to ask myself is this: Why do I value computer games, where you can progress a lot in a short amount of time, less, than I value real life things, where it takes a lot more work and effort to actually progress and feel this sense of progression?

Why do I get a bad feeling when playing games, after the matter of fact where I do not get such feelings when doing parkour or painting? Even though both are in the grand scheme of things equally senseless and their only value to me is that they make me happy by providing me with a forward arrow of progress? Shouldn't I be more content with the progress I get from games, because I am progressing a lot more in a shorter time?

I think this boils down to two things: the nature of challenge and the cultural in-acceptance attached to computer games. I think both are a little connected so let's explore those two concepts a little more in depth:

The question I quickly glossed over earlier is why I love the sense of progression at all - I mean sure. To me it feels right and to many other people as well, but why? Why can I feel right and good when progressing towards being a better person? When thinking of it on evolutionary terms it becomes quite obvious why that would be. Humans that were just the right amount of curious and hungry for more over time made their lives considerably better and therefore produced overall more offspring giving them a competitive edge. Therefore most humans around today can value progress. I would argue that it makes almost everyone inherently happy when they have mastered a skill that they previously did not have. I mean just take a look at children who learn new things constantly and how they smile and laugh and are excited about their accomplishments.

There is another side attached to this though - because as always nurture plays a role. The deep love of progress is not equally ingrained the same inside everyone and I know enough people who do not seem to get the same kick out of learning new stuff as other people do.

And I think this has to do with probably a little bit of both - genetic variation might play a role but also the upbringing of people can change this type of behavior. So the other part that makes me love progression is that since an early age I got pushed by my parents, especially my mother to be good at things. Pushed might be the wrong word. Mildly encouraged and strengthened in the sense that progression is good and that it is good to excel at learning new skills. Progression therefore was something I always got rewarded for with encouragement and I think that sticked very well.

So to sum up - liking the sense of progression is a sum of both - nature and nurture. But let's get back to the nature of challenge - the nature of challenge is that hard things are fun for people because hard things promise our brains rewards and the flood of dopamine when solving a hard thing after a long time of stretching ourselves for a long or very long time might just be one of the best feelings within the realm of human experience. And the thing is that the harder one worked to accomplish something the more subjectively happy this experience is. And it feels right when done. And here, within this nature of challenge lies the problem with most computer games. Computer games are artificially created things, that provide just the right amount of challenge. But the challenges are unlike so many others inherently worthless. But the hardness of the challenge and the way it is rewarded are different from other real skills and even more importantly - real things offer something to show for the hard work put into them, that is accepted as a token of personal achievement, outside of a small group of people who know what is going on. Which is the second point of why playing computer games is bad. It is because society does not accept it and there is a small part in almost every human that needs to be accepted by others. A prime motivator from earlier more tribal days that looks immensely foolish in our modern times, but nonetheless it is there. This voice that says, nah... nobody values what you have done there, therefore it is worthless. In a way this voice sucks but since it is there, at least within my brain and I have not found a way to stop it yet, I care about what other people think and this shapes my actions. If I want it to be true or not. Therefore, when playing computer games I am not gaining the admiration of other people and therefore the time put into them feels worth less. And that sucks. Because computer games are fun and without the guilt and shame connected to them they would be all the better. But wait... Would they be?

Or can we establish a point, that makes computer games actually less worthwhile than other things humans have done. In my mind yes. There are certain things that make computer games worse than other games and other things that I would like to pursue more. For one thing playing computer games for long times every day constitutes a considerable damage to health. Sitting for to long with really bad posture eating less healthily and less heartily, doing less with friends, having less social interactions with other people and a high exposure to blue light and therefore erratic sleep rhythms are all concerns that make me think that computer games can severely harm the health of the overzealous gamer.

The other and even graver problem is that computer games are built to be sticky. They are built so that players can lose themselves in arbitrarily set challenges and game for hours and hours and hours and eventually get addicted in a way. Because that's what a good game should do, it should get you into a flow state easily and for extended periods of time they are dangerous. Because of control. Losing control over the hours spent playing computer games is a lot easier than losing control over the hours spent writing or the hours spent climbing or doing parkour or learning a new language or coding. And that makes games and computer games in general really dangerous to the idea of how I would like to live my life. There are all these beautiful things, that I want to try, way to many to actually do all of them and the depth of all of these adventures to go on is incredible.

And I do not want to spend my time only ever doing one of them, I want to experience a little bit of most and stretch myself in more than one domain and progress towards something in more than one domain. And computer games harm me in this approach, because here I am developing a singular skill, getting caught in a custom designed flow trap which at some points does not loosen its grip even against my will. And that is something I can not stand. Because it is dangering the way I would like to live my live and therefore makes me ashamed of myself. It keeps me from going where I want to and therefore I consider it dangerous. At least to myself.

Knowing that I am the kind of person who can get lost easily in playing a lot and responding very strongly to new stimuli, to new adventures, to new skills to learn, I know that I am at risk of losing myself in these kinds of environments and also knowing that the real world offers overall more valuable experiences for the reasons mentioned above - social approval and actual difficulty and value within the real world - which in the best case would mean money and less worry about losing the freedom to do whatever I want - I try to keep away from games as much as possible, because they can take away my freedom and unless you have the basic habits nailed down that prevent you from harming yourself by doing something to excessively you should avoid that thing to. At all costs, because it can in the end destroy your life and take all your dreams and aspirations down with you.
